Every year, thousands of immigrants make the dangerous journey through Mexico into the lower Southern regions of the United States. With hopes of arriving to the country, establishing roots and living the American dream, migrants travel through less than favorable conditions. The journey is often characterized as a dangerous one, where migrants face daily exploitation and harsh conditions. After traveling through the Mexican state in varying temperatures, surviving through a lack of water and bad weather, hundreds of migrants die in route. 

In states that share a border with Mexico — Texas, Arizona, California and New Mexico, a heavy influx of migrants on foot have traveled through deserts and often succumb to death by natural causes for their bodies to be found, and in some cases, identified. In Pima County, Arizona, the medical examiner’s office is in charge with analyzing the remains of the dead. The county, which is located in the South central region of the state near the Sonoran Desert, is not only tasked with documenting the deaths of the county but is especially invested in gathering the remains of migrants as well as attempt to discover who they are. 

But, identification measures are difficult and the process can be stagnant. A reportedly low number of migrants traveling to the United States carry identification cards or paper work. Coupled with the possibility to lose personal possessions and the need to travel lightly makes migrants not only vulnerable during travel but also in death. 

For Pima County, this process has been especially revolutionary in determining an accurate amount of deaths while also providing the families and friends of dead migrants with lasting closure. The county has partnered with the medical examiner and Humane Borders Inc., a faith based group that supports migrants making the journey throughout the desert, to create a public tool for people to be able to potentially identify their loved ones by name or other characteristics. In spite of increased efforts to identify bodies, the department still has trouble identifying dead migrants. 

According to the Pima County Annual 2016 report, migrant bodies are classified as “undocumented border crossings”, defined as, “foreign nationals who die attempting to cross the southern Arizona desert without permission from the United States government”. Since 2001, the county has 2,615 recovered remains of undocumented migrants. In 2016, the year with the most recent data available, 154 recoveries were made in the calendar year. 

In an interview, medical examiner of the Pima County Greg Hess said that about 55 percent of the recoveries are later identified and the office expects to increase their rate of identifications as they continue to work with immigration enforcement agencies. 

But, between 2001 and 2016, 1,676 migrants were later identified compared to 939 unidentified bodies. However, according to the 2016 Pima County Office of the Medical Examiner report, of the 154 bodies recovered bodies found in the year, 94 bodies were unidentified. 

Most bodies are recovered in the Summer months, when migrants are more likely to travel throughout the desert. In the calendar year of 2016, there were 24 recoveries in both June and July compared to 9 recoveries in May. The Winter months had a generally lower amount of recoveries made. In February, there was only one recovery made, according to the data. 

The age of the person can also contribute to how easily identifiable bodies and skeletal remains are for medical examiners, Hess said. A majority of the recovered bodies are not easily identifiable by age. In 2016, 94 of 154 all recoveries could not identified in a specific age group. Fifty recoveries were between the ages of 20-39. 

When attempting to identify bodies however, the conditions in which the bodies are found in are most often varied. The biggest distinguishing factor between recovered bodies are the conditions in which they are found. Condition levels, measured on a scale of one to eight, can directly impact how quickly they can be processed and potentially identified. 

According to the Pima County Annual 2016 report, the scale is based on the level of decomposition the body is found in. A condition level of one means the body is “fully fleshed” and just recently recovered. Comparably, level seven is a body six to eight month post-mortem indicating the body has reached full skeletonization. 

A majority of migrant  bodies found are in level one level of decomposition with 868 recoveries found in that condition from calendar years 2001-2016. But there have been 498 bodies recovered with level seven recoveries over the same time period.

In an attempt to provide more details that can help identify the bodies, the cause of death can also help identify, and more so see what has killed migrants in the past. In 2016, the cause of death for 71 percent of migrants was determined as unidentified, partially because of the state in which bodies are found. According to the  Pima County Annual 2016 report, the remaining migrants die of weather extremes, dehydration and in few cases, hazardous injuries like gunshots and car accidents. 

The causes of migrant deaths are especially important to pin down in order to attempt to prevent future migrants from dying. Organizations like Humane Borders, Inc. strive to provide migrants with resources like water in an attempt to address one of the main causes of death. Though Hess said the more dead migrants will likely be identified throughout the years, the struggle remains to try to bring closer for families seeking to find out what happened to their loved ones. 
